
Text for translation: Excerpt from the 1782 Liaisons Dangeureuses ( Dangerous Liaisons) by Choderlos de Laclos:

Vous devinez que j'ai consenti, vous n'imaginez pas combien elle me cajole depuis ce moment, combien surtout elle est édifiée de me voir régulièrement à ses prières et à sa Messe. Elle ne se doute pas de la Divinité que j'y adore. Me voilà donc, depuis quatre jours, livré à une passion forte. vous savez si je désire vivement, si je dévore les obstacles: mais ce que vous ignorez, c'est combien la solitude ajoute à l'ardeur du désir. Je n'ai plus qu'une idée; j'y pense le jour, et j'y rêve la nuit. J'ai bien besoin d'avoir cette femme, pour me sauver du ridicule d'en être amoureux: car où ne mène pas un désir contrarié? Ô délicieuse jouissance! Je t'implore pour mon bonheur et surtout pour mon repos. Que nous sommes heureux que les femmes se défendent si mal! nous ne serions auprès d'elles que de timides esclaves. J'ai dans ce moment un sentiment de reconnaissance pour les femmes faciles, qui m'amène naturellement à vos pieds. Je m'y prosterne pour obtenir mon pardon, et j'y finis cette trop longue Lettre. Adieu, ma très belle amie: sans rancune.

Issues about Franco-English translation:

- Nature of French sentence construction is different than the English one.
	1. Adjectives are placed after the noun, as opposed to English where the qualifying adjectives come before the noun. For example, while in English one would say 'the blue car', in French one would say "la voiture bleue" (translated as 'the car blue').

	2.The issue of Emphasis. In French, the object of emphasis is placed first and then recurrs under the form of a pronoun. It is a very prevalent sentence construction in French, but is not very natural in English. In French you would say "Ce n'est pas moi qui ai acheté la voiture", which would literally be translated as "it is not I who bought the car", which sounds weird. We would just say "I did not buy the car".

	3.Passive sentence constructions are much less common in French than in English. This is due to the existence of the 'on', impersonal construction in French (to signify that some unknown entity 'on' has done the action, like in "on a fermé la porte"), and also thanks to the existence of the expression 'se + verb'. There is some sort of an English equivalent for this, as exemplified in the sentence "apples are selling at two euros a kilo" ( 'les pommes se vendent à deux euros le kilo')

	4. Transitive verbs are used in an intransitive manner sometimes in French. They therefore need to be slightly recast in English. For example, one could say in French "Au risque de scandaliser..." which might be translated as 'At the risk of scandalizing...' but which is actually much more idiomatic as 'at the risk of provoking a scandal'.

	5. Negations are split in two in French. In English, when there isn't a contraction to 'don't', the two words 'do' and 'not' are at least contiguous, which is not the case in French. The expression is 'ne pas' in French, but while the 'ne' is right before the verb it negates, the 'pas' is after the verb, as in "je n'aime pas" ( I do not like) or 'je ne veux pas' (i do not want). In the spoken language, and in everything but formal writing, the 'ne' is dropped. We might therefore say or read "je veux pas" for " I do not want", although this would literally be translated by 'I want not'

Other differences : 

- Differences in the use of to be/to have in French, as compared to their English uses. For example, the expression "I have come", for example in the sentence "I have come to see you", would be translated as "Je suis venu te voir", which is "I am come to see you" literally. 

- French also has a lot of pronouns that get 'cut off'. For example, I have is not "Je ai" but 'j'ai', because the language does not allow for two consecutive vowel sounds. 
The placement of these pronouns is also different from in English. Whereas in English, one would say " I found it", it French it would be "Je l'ai trouvé", which could theoretically be expanded to "Je le ai trouvé" ( although this is incorrect, it is just to illustrate the point), which would then be "I it have found".  Interestingly enough, this also shows us that, whereas the English past participle 'have' is implicit in the sentence 'I found it", in French it cannot be excluded. One must say "je l'ai trouvé", as opposed to the nonsensical "Je le trouvé" (I it found). It is therefore not enough to have a rule to switch the pronoun's place here. We need to switch the pronoun, have the past participle, and the contraction of the pronoun because of the fact that the past participle starts with a consonant.
However, if we were translating from French to English, since the past participle is already present, this would have yielded something like " I have found it", which leads to a change of register, to something which may sound more formal than it was meant to be. 

- Demonstrative pronouns are tricky in French. For example, the pronoun 'ce' can refer to 'this' or 'that' and even 'that which', depending on context. 
Other prepositions like 'de' are also tricky and error prone since it could mean 'of' (usually when there is a quantity that follows) or 'by' if there is a subject behind, or even from. It could also mean 'to' in the context of an impersonal sentence structure, like 'it is imperative to', which in French would be 'il est indispensable de...'
Trickiest may be the adverb/preposition 'en' which can be translated by 'in' ( if it's a country), by 'from there', 'here, from it', 'of them', 'of it', 'made of', 'in', 'by', 'while'. It therefore has a multiplicity of meanins, which depend on the context in which it is found. There is furthermore no written distinction between the adverbial and the prepositional forms of the word, unlike in Spanish where there is a diacritic accent to differentiate (for example sí meaning yes, versus si meaning if).

- An obvious but a very major difference is that French places a distinction both on gender and on status or formality, That is to say that all genders must be collpased to a single 'the' (as opposed to 'le' and 'la'), and all addresses are collapsed to 'you' ( as opposed to the 'tu' and 'vous' distinction in French). This may not cause errors per say, but may change the register of the language and alter the effect intended by the author. In some cases, alternate forms may need to be find to be able to preserve these. What is more, while French always has these before nouns, in English, the pronouns are usually implicit ( in French we would say 'ce que veulent les femmes', which is literally translated as 'what the women want', instead of the more idiomatic 'what women want').
 
We therefore need a rule which eliminates the peropositions in the translation, if before an indefinite/indeterminate plural noun. However, it is necessary if it precedes a specified noun. ('On est allé chez le dentiste' is correctly translated as 'we went to the dentist's'). In our text, this is seen with the example of "that women defend themselves so badly", instead of 'that the women defend themselves so badly'
Interestingly enough, the plural form of the pronouns do not mark gender. Therefore the possessive pronoun 'ses' could be translated by 'his' or 'her', depending on the word that follows. The French 'ses' does not make a difference based on the word that follows. We see this in our text with the example of 'ses prières' which could be either 'her prayers' or 'his prayers' (and in this case it is 'her')

- Reflective particules are also very prevalent in the French language, with reflexive verbs. For example, there is a cohort of verbs like 'se regarder, se parler, se trouver...' which use this reflexive 'se', which expresses an interaction with oneself or with another person (these are respectively 'to look at oneself/each other', 'to talk to each other/ to oneself', 'to find oneself somewhere'). The 'se' alone has no real translation, it needs its context to best determine what the action is, and if it is self reflexive or with another person ('I find myself at a crossroad in my life' for example). The French use these reflexive verbs a lot, and some may not readily have a translation. It is common to explain a decision in French by saying to someone 'Je me suis dit que...' which is literally translated as 'I told myself', but which is more accurately translated as 'I figured...'

The rules we used: 

1- We wanted to make the difference between conditional si ('if') and comparative si ('so'). We checked to see whether the word that followed 'si' in the French version was an adjective and, if so, changed the 'si' from 'if' to 'so' in the english version. This enabled us to determine whether preposition 'si' wass being used as a conditional or as comparative ( difference between translating to 'if' or to 'so'). If followed by an adjective, it is the comparative 'so', and if not, it is the conditional 'if'. We used a comprehensive gazeteer of french adjectives. 
Example : Instead of ' we are lucky that women defend themselves if badly' -> 'we are lucky that women defend themselves so badly' (the french word for 'badly' is the adjective 'mal').

2- We do not translate the particular 'pas', since otherwise we get double negation in English. We need to account for the fact that 'ne pas' is actually one negation, and not two separate negations. 
Example : We were gettting 'what you not know not' (direct translation of 'ne savez pas') so we deleted the second one to get 'What you not know'. 
We then have a rule to add the particule 'do' before the 'not' which precedes present tense verbs. 
 
 3-A related rule for the negation is that if the French form is n apostrophe verb, then the negation in Englishbecomes 'cannot'. For example here, the correct translation for the French "Je n'imagine pas" is 'I cannot imagine', whereas "I not imagine" is incorrect
   
4- The reflexive 'se' is the same for everything in French (male / female/ singular/ plural) and it is attached to the verb as opposed to the subject, as in english. This yields a translation of 'les femmes se défendent' as 'women self defend' instead of 'women defend themselves'. We wrote a rule to fix that, by checking what ending the french word before 'self' has. If it's an 'e', we put 'herself', if it's an 's', we put themselves, and otherwise it's 'himself'
We then get 'women defend themselves', since in French the original was 'les femmes se defendent' (the plural form was used).

5- In French, the word 'pour' is ambiguous, and can mean either 'to' or 'for' depending on the word that follows . 
We have a rule to chek cases where the first word is'for', and to see what follows it, in order to disambiguate between the two cases. If the word that follows is a verb, we change the 'for' to a 'to'

6 - We resolve the French ambiguity stemmed by the preposition 'de', which can mean 'to' ( as in 'surprised to see me') or 'of' like ('made of wood') by checking whether the first word of the tuple is a verb or not. If the first word is a verb and it is followed by 'of', we switch the 'of' to a 'to'.

7 -  In french, the preposition 'me' comes before the verb, so it would be "to me save" instead of 'to save me'. Therefore, a simple rule we made was to swap the two if we had 'me' + verb (so that effectively we would have verb+me).

8- We have a rule for indeterminate plural nouns which follow 'the'. In these cases, we need to remove 'the' (as in "we are lucky that women defend themselves", instead of "we are lucky that the women defend themselves". French always has determinants in front of every noun, but in some cases in English (when the noun is indefinite and refers to all members of a group instead of one in particular, like in this case "women" in general) the determinant is not needed.

9- We add 'ly' to an adjective that ends a sentence. In French, the adverb and the adjectif form is the same. Therefore 'se défendent mal' translates to 'defend themselves bad' or 'defend themselves badly', altough only the second version is correct in english. We therefore need to transform the adjectif 'bad' to an adverb.

10- Swap consecutive nouns and adjectives since French and English have a different ordering for these. For example, in our excerpt, 'une passion forte' in French translates to 'a passion strong'. We therefore swap the two words to get the grammatical English version 'a strong passion'.

Error analysis : 

Google Translate Version: 

I guess you made, you can not imagine how she coaxes from that moment, how it is built especially to see me regularly to his prayers and his Messe. She did not doubt the Divinity that I adore. So here I am, four days ago, delivered a strong passion. you know if I am anxious, if I devour obstacles, but what you do not know is how much loneliness adds to the heat of desire. I do not have an idea, I think the day, and I dream at night. I really need to have this woman to save me from ridiculous to be in love: because when one does not lead thwarted desire? Oh delicious enjoyment! I beg you for my happiness and especially for my rest. We are happy that women defend themselves so badly! we would be with them as timid slaves. I feel in this moment of recognition for women easy, brings me naturally to your feet. I prostrate myself for my forgiveness, and I finished this long letter. Farewell, my lovely friend, without rancor.

And an official book translation : 

You can guess that I have agreed. You cannot imagine how she has cajoled me since then, above all how edified she is at my regularity at prayers and mass. She has no suspicion what divinity I adore there. Here am I then for the last four days, in the throes of a doughty passion. You know how keen are my desires, how I brush aside obstacles to them: but what you do not know is how solitude adds ardor to desire. I have but one idea; I think of it all day and dream of it all night. It is very necessary that I should have this woman , if I would save myself from the ridicule of being in love with her: for whither may not a thwarted desire lead one? O delicious pleasure! I implore thee for my happiness and above all for my repose. How lucky it is for us that women defend themselves so badly! Else we should be to them no more than timid slaves. At present I have a feeling of gratitude for yielding women which brinbgs me so naturally to your feet. I prostrate myself to implore your pardon, and so conclude this too long epistle. Adieu, my fairest friend: without hard feelings.

Observations : 
Although the book translation is slightly more interprative and less true to the original French, it is a good benchmark for us to compare both our translation and the google translate one. Indeed, while the google translate version is more grammatical than ours, a lot of the meaning is off, and some things just do not even come close to meaning anything similar to the French text, as in the very first part of the first sentence ' I guess you made', which is meant to be 'You can guess that I have'. A lot of the google translation meanings are off 'built' instead of edified, 'four days ago' instead 'since four days', and 'I do not have an idea' instead of "I have but one idea". It also translates 'où' to 'when' although this accented où is never used to mean 'when', and always to mean 'where', as our translation correctly has it.  The google translate version also fails to invert all adjective and noun pairs, and for example still has 'women easy' instead of 'easy women', as our translation correctly swaps the two. 

The google translate however makes an effort to try and conjugate the verbs properly. It correctly conjugates 'coax' to 'coaxes' since the preposition 'she' precedes it, and conjugates 'add' to 'adds' in the phrase 'loneliness ads to the heat of desire'.  However, it also has some inconsistencies. The last sentence reads "I prostrate myself (...) and I finished this (...)". Both verbs are meant to be in the present tense, but here, the second one has been conjugated to the past tense.  Therefore, although google does a better interprative work with verbs, it also seems to just have more rules for conjugation, which means that there is pleanty of room for errors

Both systems fail to correctly identify subjects in some cases. For example, both our translation and the google translation have the phrase "to see me regularly at his prayers and at his Mass", although it is meant to be 'her prayers and her mass', in reference to the 'she' from the same sentence. It is hard to tell from the French version, since the French possessive 'sa' (or 'his/her') does not have the mark of the subject, as in English, but the mark of the object it possesses. Therefore, in French, the 'sa' is feminine because it refers to 'mass' which is feminine in French ,and not because it is the mass of a woman ('her' mass). Similarly, since prayer is plural in the French, it carries the mark of the plural 'ses', which could either be his or her in English. In order to get this to translate properly, it would be necessary to have a system which identified the subject of each of these possessive pronouns, so that it could correctly choose between the masculine or feminine marks (his / her).
Another shortcoming is identifying direct objects, as in the phrase "I think of it all day, and dream of it all night". Our translation has 'I there think all day, I there think all night' and the google translation altogether eliminates it with "I think all day and dream all night". We would therefore need a system which can identify direct objects, to know that the translation for 'J'y' ( which can mean 'there' or 'of it/of her/ of him'), in this case, is 'of it'.
